With all the different things in the world that change day by day, some can beone can encounter positive and some can be negative changes. Due to the fact of breakthroughs in Artificial Intelligence (AI), the effect on the job world and how National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) contributes to the growth and positive reflection of Artificial Intelligence, it seems as though AI will definitely be a positive change. The future of the Artificial Intelligence is getting stronger and stronger as each day passes. With the unemployment rates still around 5.5% and decreasing from previous months, Artificial Intelligence is mostly a positive negative change on the outlook of the job market because of the advancement of technology. As NASA is the leading space aviator in the country, there is no one else fit to gain, boost moral and contribute towards AI. Artificial Intelligence will be one of the top technological necessities in the near future.

As time, seasons, and technology change, so does the definition of Artificial Intelligence. “Artificial Intelligence, in light of this definition of intelligence, is simply the application of artificial or non-naturally occurring systems that use the knowledge-level to achieve goals” (Newell). The easiest definition to believe in is that AI is any machine that relates to a human if it’s through a program. Artificial Intelligence is “the ability of a computer or other machine to perform those activities that are normally thought to require intelligence” (Dictionary). Some machines were and are built to make our lives easier, keep us alive longer and stay healthy.

“The only everyday ‘robots’ so far are things like car-building machines in Detroit, Sony's Aibo plastic dog, and mini-moon rovers that crawl through blast sites. Is the definition of the word robot ‘any machine that adjusts its own behavior according to feedback from its sensors?’ If so, thermostats, microwave ovens and light-sensitive patio lights are robots, too” (Pogue).

With all the technological advancements everyday, Artificial Intelligence will improve over time.
Artificial Intelligence is not just a machine that not only performs futile activities but can also provide useful help in lawenforcement, construction, cleaning, entertainment and medical services. The law Enforcement enforcement type is widely used as a robot that sees and moves into a territory to capture a video of the suspect or suspects. Another example of AI is used in law enforcement when Policeofficers get around streets, airports and sidewalks with the all newly invented Segway. With the use of the Segway,